[Add] Profiling PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to `torch.profiler` (#3389)
huggingface/blog: torch-profiler.md

---

> title: "Profiling PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "A Beginner's Guide to Profiling with torch.profiler"
```

"Profiling PyTorch" feels a bit misleading for the scope of this tutorial.

Author: I wanted to start with the series name, here "Profiling PyTorch", and then the actual title of the current blog post.

Reviewer: Then "Profiling in PyTorch" sounds a bit better to me.

Author: Yes sir! Keeping "Profiling in PyTorch" as the series name. Thanks for the great suggestion.

> thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-profiler/todo.png

Author: Reminder: Add a thumbnail before publishing.

authors:

>   - user: ariG23498

Author: Please feel free to add your HF usernames as you are done with the reivews!

---

> If you are anything like me, you have probably always wondered what happens under the hood of a model's forward call. To quench that thirst, you first read the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), look at the PyTorch operations, and then wonder how those kernels are dispatched on the GPU, and how they actually run.

Reviewer: "If you are anything like me"

Adding multiple authors would make it read a bit exclusive. 

An alternative:

> Wondering about what happens under the hood of a model's forward pass is a useful curiosity.

Reviewer: Being curious about a model's forward is probably more about the sequence in which the semantic ops/blocks are called (input layer, transformer blocks, modulation ops, output normalization, output patchfication, etc.). 

It's probably not much about the PyTorch ops being used (using `torch.split` vs. `torch.chunk`, for example) and quite possibly not about how kernels are dispatched on the GPU. 

I think one would need to have some kind of specific aspect in mind to be on the lookout for these factors. Hence, the intro could benefit from a bit of rewording.

Author: I agree with this. After applying the changes proposed by @sergiopaniego I have moved some sections in the introduction. This will be addressed in the latest commit.

> 

Reviewer: Upto this point, I think we haven't quite connected why one might need to look into kernel dispatches, to look at what PyTorch ops are being used. 

I don't think they are tied to a general curiosity to peak through what is happening in a model forward pass.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I tend to agree. The modeling files are (or should be) enough to understand what the model does. Profiling is more about understanding _how_. The motivation is usually performance (what runs on cpu vs gpu, where are the bottlenecks, how can we maximize hardware utilization), but it's also a good opportunity to learn about gpu architectures, parallelization, and systems design in general.

Author: I have updated the introduction considerably keeping the pointers in mind. Does it read better now?

> Working at Hugging Face has its own perks, you are surrounded by smarter people all the time. Upon talking to my colleagues about my motivation I was quickly pointed to the "skill of profiling". If I was given a dollar for every time I was advised to work on profiling, I would have 3 dollars, because I had asked [Sayak Paul](https://huggingface.co/sayakpaul), [Rémi Ouazan Reboul](https://huggingface.co/ror), and [Ferdinand Mom](https://huggingface.co/3outeille).

Reviewer: But you asked it more than once. So, maybe a wrong calculation 🤪

> In this essay, we will try to put together a "how to profile" document from a beginner's point of view. You need no prerequisites to go through this. We will try to make this as educational as possible, so this can be treated as a leisurely read with some "Aha!" moments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this essay, we document "how to profile in PyTorch" from a beginner's point of view. You need no prerequisites to go through this, apart from knowing basic PyTorch. We will try to make this as educational as possible, so this can be treated as a leisurely read with some "Aha!" moments.
```

Tries to be more specific.

> This is the opening post of **Profiling PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to richer workloads.

Reviewer: "Profiling in PyTorch" is a better name, IMO.

Author: I like it! I will make the changes accordingly.

> This is the opening post of **Profiling PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to richer workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the opening post of **Profiling PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to more advanced workloads, involing large models.
```

## The matrix multiplication and addition operation

> As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), like we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start with anything else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), like we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start our profiling journey with anything else.
```

Might be easy for the reader to miss out on context

> [!NOTE]

> > Here is the entire script that we use for the essay: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py)

Reviewer: It could make sense to have an accompanying GitHub repo for this because of discoverability. Something like github.com/huggingface/profiling-in-pytorch. No strong opinions.

Reviewer: Also, should this like go just before "## The matrix multiplication and addition operation"? It feels a bit out of place here.

Author: I wanted to drive more eyes to our Hub, hence adding the scripts there.

> Also, should this like go just before "## The matrix multiplication and addition operation"? It feels a bit out of place here.

Absolutely right! I will be editing this in the latest commit.

```py
def fn(x, w, b):
  return torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)
```

> > As you have correctly noticed we have added a matrix addition to the matrix multiplication to mimic the weights and biases interaction in a neuron. This addition (pun intended) will help us work with compilations better.

Reviewer: > will help us work with compilations better.

At this point, a beginner might not know why compilation even matters. The inclusion also feels a bit rushed at this point.

Author: I wanted to hint at something (which comes later, namely compilation) as a reason to include "addition" along with "multiplication". I agree that this sentence might feel a bit weird, any suggestions?

Reviewer: How about:

> This addition (pun intended) will help us understand how it paves the way for compilation later in the essay.

> > As you have correctly noticed we have added a matrix addition to the matrix multiplication to mimic the weights and biases interaction in a neuron. This addition (pun intended) will help us work with compilations better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> As you have correctly noticed, we have added a matrix addition to the matrix multiplication to mimic how weights and biases interact in a neuron. This addition (pun intended) will help us work with compilations better.
```

To profile we will be using the `torch.profiler` module. The steps involved are:

1. Have the algorithm ready (here `def fn`, which wraps the matrix multiplication and addition)

> 2. Annotate the algorithm. The `record_function` annotates our function as `matmul_add`

Reviewer: Might be helpful to add a line or two about why this might be useful since it's not a must to annotate.

Author: Will be addressed in the latest commit.

  ```py
  def step():
    with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
      return fn(x, w, b)
  ```
3. Wrap the code with the `torch.profiler.profile` context manager
  ```py
    with torch.profiler.profile(
      activities=[
          torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,
          torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA,
      ],
    ) as prof:

>       for _ in range(5):

Reviewer: Could be helpful to add a small comment explaining why we have to run it multiple times if we're not explaining it later.

Author: This is a good idea, do you think we should only talk about warumps here? OR that we should have a more holistic "on average" understanding of the algorithm hence more iterations make sense.

Reviewer: Just talking about warmups for the context of the code snippet is fine, IMO.

        step()
        prof.step()
  ```
4. Export the profile
  ```
  prof.export_chrome_trace(trace_path)
  prof.key_averages().table(sort_by="cuda_time_total", row_limit=15)
  ```

The profiler exports two distinct artifacts:

> 1. The profiler table: Provides the statistical summary of the algorithm. It answers "What is expensive". This becomes really helpful to figure out hotspots in the algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The profiler table: Provides the statistical summary of the algorithm. It answers "What is expensive". This becomes really helpful to figure out bottlenecks in the algorithm.
```

Author: I particularly did not want to use the term "bottlenecks" as they might not be bottlenecks. Hotspots are considered to be algorithms that just take more time (due to either it being a bottleneck, or the number of calls triggered).

If you still think this is a bottleneck, let me know and I would be happy to swap the terms.

Reviewer: So, "hotspots in the algorithm" would mean "algorithms in the algorithm"? Am I interpreting that right?

Author: Does this make more sense: "This becomes really helpful to figure out hotspots".

> 2. The profiler trace: Provides the temporal execution view. Answers "When and Why it happened". Helpful when we want to investigate dependencies and overlaps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The profiler trace: Provides the temporal execution view. Answers "When and Why it happened", depicting the activities taking place on the CPU and the GPU. This is helpful when we want to investigate the kernel(s) that were launched, any delays in launching them, any overlap between CPU and GPU activities, etc.
```

Let's see the two in action with our first execution.
```bash

> uv run 01_matmul_add.py

Reviewer: (nit): It probably will fail on a machine that doesn't have CUDA. So, a small disclaimer note would be helpful here.

```

If you run the above you will find a folder `traces/01_matmul_add` with the two artifacts:
```
64_bf16_cold_eager.json
64_bf16_cold_eager.txt
```

> 

Reviewer: It would probably not be too daunting if we showed a part of the table here for easier readability.

The `.txt` file holds the profiler table. Upon opening the file, one would be greeted with a big table with the first column consisting of the events that were triggered inside the scope of profile.

> The other columns are related to the time the event takes on the CPU or GPU. Look at which events take the most amount of time, and try to intuitively understand if that event should in fact take so much time. It is also important to look at the column "# of Calls" which dictates how many times the event was triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other columns are related to the time the event takes on the CPU or GPU or any other device(s) specified in `activities` within `torch.profiler.profile`. Look at which events take the most amount of time, and try to intuitively understand if that event should in fact take that time. It is also important to look at the column "# of Calls" which dictates how many times the event was triggered.
```

Reviewer: I think it would be cool to take some examples to further expand on these.

While we are at it, let's also talk about "Self CPU/CUDA" vs "CPU/CUDA total". The "Self" columns measure time spent only inside the event itself, excluding its children. The "total" columns include the event and all of its children together. So if you look at the "CPU total" of `matmul_add`, it consists of the time it took on self plus the children events it triggered. This is an important demarcation to note.

If you have looked at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that

```bash
Self CPU time total: 2.304ms
Self CUDA time total: 20.640us
```

> The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us` which is an immediate red flag. The GPU stays idle most of the time and this is a textbook case of the algorithm being "launch bound". In simple words, the launch overheads on the CPU side are much larger than the work the kernel does on the GPU. The easiest way to move out of the "launch bound" region is to make a bigger matrix multiplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, we are spending ~112x more time than the GPU on the CPU.  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. This is a textbook case of the algorithm being "overhead bound". In simple words, the launch overheads on the CPU side are much larger than the work the kernel does on the GPU. The easiest way to move out of the "overhead bound" regime is to make a bigger matrix multiplication.
```

Reviewer: We're mentioning "the work the kernel does on the GPU" but we haven't quite mentioned which kernel is being referred to here. Mentioning that explicitly would be helpful.

```bash

> uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 

Reviewer: Then it would be nice to specify the dimensions on the earlier run as well.

```

```bash
Self CPU time total: 4.911ms
Self CUDA time total: 5.045ms
```

> We have materialized more GPU time just by increasing the size of the matrix multiplications. If you open the table you would also notice that the most CUDA time is now taken by `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..` and not by `matmul_add`. This means that we were indeed able to move from launch bound to compute bound.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have materialized more GPU time just by increasing the size of the matrix multiplications. If you open the table you would also notice that the most CUDA time is now taken by `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..` and not by `matmul_add`. This means that we were indeed able to move from overhead bound to compute bound.
```

Reviewer: Comparing the two rows side-by-side would be quite convenient here.

> We now move into visualising the dispatch chain, which lives inside the `.json` artifacts. You can upload them to [Perfetto UI](https://ui.perfetto.dev) and see the traces, OR you can use `uvx trace-util traces -b traces` to generate the Perfetto links directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now move into visualising the dispatch chain, which lives inside the `.json` artifacts. You can upload them to [Perfetto UI](https://ui.perfetto.dev) and see the traces, or you can use `uvx trace-util traces -b traces` to generate the Perfetto links directly.
```

## 64×64 traces

> [Perfetto Trace for 64x64](https://ui.perfetto.dev/#!/?url=https://huggingface.co/buckets/ariG23498/traces/resolve/01_matmul_add/64_bf16_cold_eager.json)

Reviewer: I would hyperlink this from the figure below.

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of a 64×64 bf16 matmul followed by an add on a CUDA GPU](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/64-matmul-add.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 1: 64×64 matmul and addition |

In Figure 1, we see the profiler trace for the matrix multiplication and addition. The script was run with default configurations which are:
- size 64: The inputs, weights and biases are sized (64, 64). This mimics a neuron interaction.
- dtype bf16: The data type is bfloat16
- no compile: We have not compiled the torch operations

> - no warmup: We have not warmed up our algorithms before profiling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- no warmup: We have not warmed up the GPU before profiling
```

> > With perfetto we suggest using the keyboard for quicker access to the trace. One could use "W A S D" for navigating the trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> With Perfetto we suggest using the keyboard for quicker access to the trace. One could use "W A S D" for navigating the trace.
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace with the CPU lane and GPU lane labelled side by side in Perfetto](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gpu-cpu-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: The CPU and GPU lanes of a PyTorch profiler trace |

> There are two lanes, one for the CPU activity and one for the GPU activity, as shown in Figure 2. In the CPU lane one would notice three profile steps. This comes from the `schedule`.

Reviewer: Is it possible to accompany a figure showing the three steps? 

From 

<img width="600" height="176" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c1c5a09f-c542-4f28-a234-c74f2e979494" />

it's unclear which three steps are being referred to here. Maybe marking them like the following would make it clearer?

<img width="16384" height="1901" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8c5933d9-165e-4caa-b8d2-95df941815f1" />

```python
schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)
```

> The `wait` skips noisy initializations, `warmup` runs through the profiler without recording, and `active` is what shows up in trace.

Reviewer: Very helpful section. However, I am not sure how `schedule` is incorporated in the actual profiling code.

Let's put on our detective hats and investigate the trace and ask some questions.

> ### Why does the ProfileStep#2 take so long?

Reviewer: Why is it called "ProfileStep#2"? Why does it not start from 0 or 1? What am I missing?

Author: The schedule looks something like this `schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)` which means

- `ProfileStep#0`: warmup
- `ProfileStep#1`: wait
- `ProfileStep#2` , `ProfileStep#3`, `ProfileStep#4`: active

Reviewer: Oh! Maybe have it written inside a collapsible section? This is very useful info!

Author: I did mention it once, but with the latest changes, I have tried making this point more clear. Thanks for the question.

| ![ProfileStep#2 in a PyTorch profiler trace appears wider than ProfileStep#3 and ProfileStep#4](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/why-is-step-2-big.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 3: `ProfileStep#2` is visibly wider than the steps that follow it |

In Figure 3, we notice that `ProfileStep#2` takes more time compared to the other steps, and upon looking closely you would see a similar pattern with the `matmul_add` annotation as well. The smoking gun is inside the annotation, not the annotation itself:

| Step | `matmul_add` start | `aten::matmul` start | gap |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| #2 | 138.736 | 366.493 | 227.757 µs |
| #3 | 517.926 | 523.447 | 5.521 µs |
| #4 | 610.039 | 614.527 | 4.488 µs |

| ![228 microsecond gap between record_function matmul_add and the aten::matmul dispatch in profile step 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-227.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: The ~228 µs dead window between `record_function("matmul_add")` and `aten::matmul` |

> That ~228 µs shown in Figure 4 is the "dead window" between entering `record_function("matmul_add")` and PyTorch actually dispatching `aten::matmul`. This can happen for multiple reasons: 

Reviewer: Very informative!

- cuBLAS keeps a persistent workspace. Even though the schedule's `warmup=1` step ran a GEMM (GEneral Matrix-Matrix Multiplication), the workspace allocation can still hit on the first active call if the previous launch's allocator/sync state hadn't settled.

- cuBLAS heuristic + algo cache lookup for this exact (M=N=K=64, bf16, NN) shape.

- Possibly a lazy module load for the specific kernel variant cuBLAS chose (64x64_sliced1x2_*).

> We can either look away or run some more warmup steps before we profile (which is the standard)

Reviewer: A bit confusing. The first set of traces, IIUC, didn't have warmup rounds. Here, we're saying "run some more warmup steps" which implies that we had some amount of warming up done before, which, I think, is not true?

Author: I see the source of confusion here. Warmup in the sense of profiling would be running the events a couple of times before actually profiling it. But here we have another warmup event inside the schedule, which is not profiled.

I will try to make this more legible in the paragraph. Thanks for catching this.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --warmup
```

[Perfetto Trace for 64x64 with Warmup](https://ui.perfetto.dev/#!/?url=https://huggingface.co/buckets/ariG23498/traces/resolve/01_matmul_add/64_bf16_warm_eager.json)

| ![PyTorch profiler trace after warmup steps where ProfileStep#2 no longer shows cold-start overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png)|
| :--: |
| Figure 5: After warming up, every profile step takes a similar amount of time |

> In Figure 5 we see that each profile steps takes similar time, but this does not mean we were able to optimize the one time overheads. We warmed up the runs so that the overheads were not profiled.

Reviewer: This is interesting. Maybe these one-off trade-offs aren't worth eliminating. But good call to end the question here, IMO.

### Why is there an offset of ~2.5 ms between the CPU and GPU lanes?

| ![2.32 millisecond offset between the CPU lane and the GPU lane in a PyTorch profiler trace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-bw-kernel-launch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 6: The 2.32 ms offset between the CPU and GPU lanes |

In Figure 6, we see that the CPU and GPU lanes have an offset of around 2.32 ms. One might think the algorithm warmup combined with the schedule's `wait` and `warmup` should keep a stable CUDA stream and would diminish the offset.

To uncover what is really happening, let's change our schedule a little

```diff
- schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)

> + schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=0, warmup=0, active=3, repeat=1)

Reviewer: Same as above. Not sure how it's integrated into the profiling code. Additionally, let's talk about what's changing in the schedule to narrate the changes in the trace better.

```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace with wait=0 warmup=0 showing an Activity Buffer Request between steps](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/full-profile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 7: With `wait=0` and `warmup=0`, the trace reveals an `Activity Buffer Request` |

Figure 7 shows us that there is an `Activity Buffer Request`.

| ![gap between matmul and add CUDA kernels caused by profiler buffer request](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/mat-add-gap.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: A gap appears between the matmul and add kernels on profile step 1 |

> Upon zooming into the GPU trace, we notice that the matmul and add kernels for step 0 happen one after the other, while the kernels for profile step 1 have a window in between. The best explanation for this is that there was an overflow of buffers, and another buffer request was issued during the kernel execution.

Reviewer: > step 0 happen

Didn't find a mention of step 0 above. It could also appear confusing now that we have steps starting from 1 here instead of 2 like above:

<img width="640" height="105" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8bc632ca-7cdb-42c8-b67b-8c26edb7b318" />

Author: I had to zoom the trace in, so it still starts with 0, but is on the extreme left outside the screenshot.

Reviewer: Perhaps a note about it for the sore eyes?

Author: Sure!

The best way to rule out other possibilities is to profile for more iterations and see whether a similar window appears in other parts of the trace. To do that we run with `active=20`.

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 active iterations confirming the buffer-request gap only appears once](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 9: With 20 active steps the gap only shows up once, confirming it is a buffer request |

> As shown in Figure 9, we see a similar trend in step 1, and can safely conclude that it was indeed another buffer request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in Figure 9, we see a similar trend in step 1, and can safely conclude that it was indeed another buffer request in step 0.
```

### The chain of events

| ![nested CPU dispatch chain in PyTorch profiler: ProfileStep, matmul_add, aten::matmul, aten::mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/cpu-nests.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: The chain of dispatch |

In Figure 10, we see the nested CPU calls. This is an important visualization, where one gets to understand what does a chain of dispatch really look like.

> We begin with `ProfileStep#<id>` which encapsulates the profiling step. Due to us annotating the step, we see the `matmul_add` row. The `matmul_add` consists of two `aten` calls, one for matrix multiplication and one for addition.

Reviewer: Very nice introduction of the section.

> The `aten::matmul` is the user-facing PyTorch operation. `aten::mm` is the 2D matrix-matrix multiply backend. It is very interesting to note how PyTorch calls `aten::bmm` (batched matrix multiplication) if we add the batch axis to our matrices.

Reviewer: I don't think `aten:matmul` is the user-facing PyTorch operation. I think you meant -- `aten::matmul` is the ATen-level dispatch that those user-facing PyTorch matmul (`torch.matmul` or `@`) calls land on.

```diff
- x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- w = torch.randn( args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

+ x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ w = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace showing aten::matmul dispatching aten::bmm for 3D batched tensors](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/bmm.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 11: Batched Matrix Multiplication |

> In Figure 11, we show just that. Upon adding the batch axis to the inputs, `aten::matmul` now encapsulates a bunch of other prerequisite CUDA runtime calls along with `aten::bmm`. This was a fascinating find and I wanted to note this behaviour.

Reviewer: Upto you but it can appear to be confusing why just bmm dispatch isn't enough. As a beginner, I would think I would need a bunch of other prerequisites + bmm (wrapped under mm).

Reviewer: (nit): If the post has multiple authors, then "we" would sound more prudent than "I".

In the rest of the essay, we will be working with simple 2D matrices, unless otherwise mentioned.

### Why does matmul have an extra CUDA runtime call?

> | ![CPU lane showing cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor preceding the matmul cudaLaunchKernel](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/cudaoccupancy.png) |

Reviewer: Cool figure!

Possible to stretch it a little bit so that readers know a bit more than "c..." (basically what's visible).

Author: I did try doing that, which in turn stretched `ProfileStep#2` in totality, which made encapsulating the idea a little difficult.

| :--: |
| Figure 12: A CUDA occupancy query fires before the matmul kernel launch |

> We notice that for `aten::mm` there are two CUDA Runtime calls, namely `cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor` and `cudaLaunchKernel`, while for `aten::add` there is only the `cudaLaunchKernel`. Why is that the case?

Reviewer: Absolute fire 🔥

> To understand this we have to look at the kernel's resource footprint. If you click on the GPU kernels you will be able to inspect the resource footprint for the respective kernel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand this, we have to look at the kernel's resource footprint. If you click on the GPU kernels, you will be able to inspect the resource footprint for the respective kernel.
```

| ![cuBLAS matmul kernel resource footprint: registers, shared memory and block size in Perfetto](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/matmul-footprint.png) | ![elementwise add CUDA kernel resource footprint with 32 registers and zero shared memory](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/add-footprint.png) |
| :--: | :--: |
| Figure 13: Matmul footprint | Figure 14: Add footprint |

`cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor` is a planning call and is purely CPU side. It asks: "given a kernel function, a chosen block size, and a chosen dynamic shared memory size, how many blocks of this kernel can simultaneously reside on one SM (Streaming Multiprocessor)?"

cuBLAS ships hundreds of kernel variants, and each has a heuristic-driven launch path that needs runtime information about hardware capacity. The occupancy query is part of that heuristic.

> From Figure 14 we see that the footprint of addition says 32 registers and zero shared memory. That fits trivially. There's nothing to query, because no hardware resource is going to limit occupancy. The kernel is, by design, resource-light.

Reviewer: It could be a nice addition, contrasting that to the specifications of the multiplication footprints in words a little bit.

> [!NOTE]

> > You can use this as a quick diagnostic when reading any trace. Scan the CPU lane for `cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor`. Each occurrence flags a "heavyweight, adaptively launched" kernel, usually a GEMM, conv, or similar. The kernels without a preceding occupancy query are the elementwise/reduction crowd that PyTorch launches mechanically.

Reviewer: If these are usually lightweight then it would be nice to mention.

### Why is cudaDeviceSynchronize so big (~1.78 ms)?

`cudaDeviceSynchronize` blocks the CPU until all GPU work on this device finishes. The profiler emits this sync at the end of the active window to flush events. Without it, kernel timings would be missing.

> A 1.78 ms sync covering 26 µs of real GPU work tells you this run was 98% idle. That's the textbook launch-bound symptom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A 1.78 ms sync covering 26 µs of real GPU work tells you this run was 98% idle. That's the textbook overhead-bound symptom.
```

## 4096×4096 traces

> We already know from the profiler table analysis that providing bigger matrices to our algorithm moves it out from the "launch bound" region to being "compute bound". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We already know from the profiler table analysis that providing bigger matrices to our algorithm moves it out from the "overhead-bound" region to being "compute-bound". 
```

Let's also maintain consistency -- "compute bound" or "compound-bound".

Let's run the command and dive deeper into the traces.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 --warmup
```

### Why does the same kernel take more time compared to others?

| ![4096x4096 bf16 matmul kernel timings varying across profiler steps on the same GPU](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/kernel-time.png)|
| :--: |
| Figure 15: One matmul kernel runs longer than the others despite identical inputs |

> In Figure 15, we notice that the matmul kernel for profile step 3 takes longer on the GPU than the others. This is particularly interesting to note, because the other kernels were the exact same, which means there were no cuBLAS heuristics involved. There are no scheduling gaps, the CPU launches are normal, and it is not a profiler artifact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Figure 15, we notice that the matmul kernel for profile step 3 takes longer on the GPU than the other steps. This is particularly interesting to note, because the other kernels launched during other steps were the exact same, which means there were no cuBLAS heuristics involved. There are no scheduling gaps, the CPU launches are normal, and it is not a profiler artifact.
```

> This trace in Figure 15 makes a useful point that's easy to miss in idealized examples: kernel runtimes are not constants, even on dedicated hardware running identical code on identical data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This trace in Figure 15 makes a useful point that's easy to miss in idealized examples: kernel runtimes are not constants, even on the same hardware environment running identical code on identical data.
```

Let's make this more concrete by modifying the script a little. We run the iteration 20 times, capturing each of the steps.

```diff
- schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)
+ schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=0, warmup=0, active=20, repeat=1)

- for _ in range(5):
+ for _ in range(20):
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 matmul iterations showing kernel runtime variance](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters-kernels.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 16: Across 20 iterations the same matmul kernel runs at different speeds |

The different compute times can be blamed to a bunch of reasons:
- GPU clocks on idle and boost
- GPU heating
- GPU power management

> - Driver side housekeeping

Reviewer: And this can even happen between the iterations running the _exact_ same code! Wow.

> A reader who only saw the average would conclude that a matmul took ~1 ms (mean of 5 = 1084 µs); a reader who looked at the trace would see that the matmul takes ~580 µs except when the GPU throws a fit. Those are very different mental models, and only one of them is correct.

Reviewer: What is meant by "GPU throws a fit"?

Author: I meant, where there was a GPU issue that does not really pin point to a certain thing.

> ## Let's see some torch compile at work

Reviewer: @vkuzo in case you want to review this bit.

Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed me. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:
1. `TorchDynamo` captures Python execution into an FX graph
2. `AOTAutograd` prepares forward/backward graphs when gradients are involved
3. `Inductor` lowers the graph into optimized CPU or GPU code.

In this section, we talk about compilation and look at the profiler traces.

```bash

> uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 --warmup --compile

Reviewer: It would be nice to show the section when the `args.compile` path is exercised.

```

| ![torch.compile region highlighted in a PyTorch profiler trace, showing TorchDynamo and Inductor frames](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/compilation-region.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 17: The compiled regions show up as TorchDynamo and Inductor frames in the trace |

### Did we fuse the matmul and add kernels into one?

| ![Compiled trace showing aten::addmm replacing the eager aten::add and aten::mm pair](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/fused-ops.png) | ![eager mode profiler trace showing separate aten::add and aten::mm dispatch](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png) |
| :--: | :--: |
| Figure 18: Compiled run dispatches a single `aten::addmm` | Figure 19: Eager run dispatches `aten::mm` and `aten::add` separately |

> Figure 18 begs the question, did we actually fuse the multiplication and addition operations together into one? This is operator fusion at the graph level. Inductor took our `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` and rewrote it into a single `aten::addmm(b, x, w)` call. The important thing to note here is that it did **not** produce a **new** fused CUDA kernel. The actual GPU work is still `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x256_ldg8_f2f_stages_64x3_nn`, the same cuBLAS kernel eager mode used. So the "fusion" here is at the dispatcher level, not at the kernel level.

Reviewer: Very very nicely written!

> ### torch.compile's runtime architecture

Reviewer: https://torchcompile-guards.hashnode.dev/inside-torchcompile-guards-how-they-work-what-they-cost-and-ways-to-optimize -- would be cool to include this link in case readers are interested to know about guards in torch.compile deeply.

> Let's look at the CPU-side hierarchy which reflects `torch.compile`'s runtime architecture.

Reviewer: A line connecting why it's important in the context of the post would be helpful.

**## Call CompiledFxGraph <hash>** is where the actual generated code runs. The string after "CompiledFxGraph" is the content hash of the FX graph. It's the same across all three active steps, confirming cache hits.

> [!TIP]
> You can find the generated code on disk under `/tmp/torchinductor_<user>/fxgraph` keyed by this hash, useful when you want to read the Triton/C++ that Inductor actually produced.

### Do the CUDA launches go down by half?

| ![compiled matmul trace showing Memcpy DtoD and GEMM kernels launched per step](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/memcpy.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 20: Each compiled step still launches two GPU kernels, a Device-to-Device memcpy and the GEMM |

When I first looked at the traces, I was really happy to notice only one `cudaLaunchKernel` per step. This directly contradicted what I was seeing in the GPU trace. There were still two kernels being launched per step, as shown in Figure 20, namely the `Memcpy DtoD (Device -> Device)` and the GEMM. Going back to the CPU trace, I noticed that I had completely missed the `cudaMemcpyAsync` dispatch.

> `addmm` computes `out = β·C + α·A·B`, and cuBLAS's GEMM-with-bias-add epilogue writes into a destination buffer that needs to already contain the bias. So Inductor's generated code does:

Reviewer: Readers might not know what an epilogue is. So, either a footnote or a hyperlink would be useful.

- `out = copy(b)` ← that's the DtoD memcpy (32 MB, takes ~33 µs)
- `out = α·(x·w) + β·out` ← GEMM with `α=β=1`, "fusing" the bias add into the writeback

The result is mathematically `out = x·w + b`. The bias add isn't "free": we pay a memcpy upfront plus a slightly more expensive GEMM epilogue.

> The "fusion" one might have hoped for, where `x·w + b` collapses into a single kernel with no extra memory traffic, isn't what happened. Inductor preserved the two memory-touching operations, it just relabeled the bias copy as a memcpy and the addition as a GEMM epilogue.

Reviewer: Cool commentary! `addmm` needs C in the full output shape, so the 1D bias gets broadcast into [M, N] and that's the DtoD copy.

One caveat worth mentioning: PyTorch can route `addmm` through cuBLAS with EPILOGUE_BIAS for 1D bf16/fp16 bias, which fuses the bias into the GEMM epilogue with no memcpy. Whether that fires depends on shape/dtype/stride heuristics in Blas.cpp, so the memcpy isn't fundamental to addmm — just to the path that got picked here.

Another point to note here is the use of "max-autotune" as the torch.compile mode. It might remove the memcpy if a Triton template wins the search (bias add fuses into the kernel epilogue), but for 4096×4096 bf16 cuBLAS is usually competitive enough that it could still win. Worth trying, IMO! If you want to force the question, setting TORCHINDUCTOR_MAX_AUTOTUNE_GEMM_BACKENDS="TRITON" will confirm whether the memcpy is avoidable.

Author: I really like the ideas. Do you mind directly suggesting the edits in the PR, it would be easy for me to accept the suggestions that way. I really like the way we are hinting the reader to more complicated things.

Reviewer: Phrasing is another issue. If the phrasing deviates from the current, then it would be a back-and-forth. I don't want that to block you. So, I will defer to you to absorb this and write in a way you think would resonate with the readers the most.

Author: This was a fun experiment! Using `max-autotune` routed the call to `aten::_foreach_copy_` and this in-tun had 3 extra cuda launches, similar to when I forced the inductor backend to triton.

I think mentioning about the route would be cool, but adding this experiment would be overwhelming.

Reviewer: 🤯

Author: Yes! Exactly the same reaction.

A truly fused implementation would skip the memcpy. That's what FlashAttention-style hand-written kernels do, and what Inductor can do via Triton codegen, but for a `4096×4096 bf16 matmul`, Inductor evidently decided "use cuBLAS, do the bias via epilogue setup" was the best path.

> ### CPU overhead went up, not down

Reviewer: Well, this would be alleviated with `mode="reduce-overhead"`. Since we hinted

"""
A truly fused implementation would skip the memcpy. That's what FlashAttention-style hand-written kernels do, and what Inductor can do via Triton codegen, but for a `4096×4096 bf16 matmul`, Inductor evidently decided "use cuBLAS, do the bias via epilogue setup" was the best path.
"""

above, I think a similar hint like "reduce-overhead" could be nice and be given to the readers as a take-home exercise.

Author: Oh! I really like this suggestion. Will add it in the latest commit.

---
title: "Profiling PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
---

# Profiling PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler

![Thumbnail of the blog post](assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png)

> If you are anything like me, you have probably always wondered what happens under the hood of a model's forward call. To quench that thirst, you first read the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), look at the PyTorch operations, and then wonder how those kernels are dispatched on the GPU, and how they actually run.

Reviewer 3: Following the idea by Sayak:

```suggestion
Have you ever wondered what happens under the hood of a model's forward call? To quench that thirst, you might find yourself reading the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), looking at the PyTorch operations, and then wondering how those kernels are dispatched on the GPU, and how they actually run.
```

> Working at Hugging Face has its own perks, you are surrounded by smarter people all the time. Upon talking to my colleagues about my motivation I was quickly pointed to the "skill of profiling". If I was given a dollar for every time I was advised to work on profiling, I would have 3 dollars, because I had asked [Sayak Paul](https://huggingface.co/sayakpaul), [Rémi Ouazan Reboul](https://huggingface.co/ror), and [Ferdinand Mom](https://huggingface.co/3outeille).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Working at Hugging Face has its own perks, you are surrounded by smarter people all the time. Upon talking to my colleagues about my motivation, I was quickly pointed to the "skill of profiling". If I was given a dollar for every time I was advised to work on profiling, I would have 3 dollars, because I had asked [Sayak Paul](https://huggingface.co/sayakpaul), [Rémi Ouazan Reboul](https://huggingface.co/ror), and [Ferdinand Mom](https://huggingface.co/3outeille).
```

This is the opening post of **Profiling PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to richer workloads.

## The matrix multiplication and addition operation

As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), like we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start with anything else.

> [!NOTE]
> Here is the entire script that we use for the essay: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py)

```py
def fn(x, w, b):
  return torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)
```

> As you have correctly noticed we have added a matrix addition to the matrix multiplication to mimic the weights and biases interaction in a neuron. This addition (pun intended) will help us work with compilations better.

> To profile we will be using the `torch.profiler` module. The steps involved are:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To profile, we will be using the `torch.profiler` module. The steps involved are:
```

1. Have the algorithm ready (here `def fn`, which wraps the matrix multiplication and addition)
2. Annotate the algorithm. The `record_function` annotates our function as `matmul_add`
  ```py
  def step():
    with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
      return fn(x, w, b)

>   ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```py
def step():
  with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
    return fn(x, w, b)
```
```

3. Wrap the code with the `torch.profiler.profile` context manager
  ```py
    with torch.profiler.profile(
      activities=[
          torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,
          torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA,
      ],
    ) as prof:
      for _ in range(5):
        step()
        prof.step()

>   ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```py
with torch.profiler.profile(
  activities=[
      torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,
      torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA,
  ],
) as prof:
  for _ in range(5):
    step()
    prof.step()
```
```

4. Export the profile
  ```
  prof.export_chrome_trace(trace_path)
  prof.key_averages().table(sort_by="cuda_time_total", row_limit=15)

>   ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```py
prof.export_chrome_trace(trace_path)
prof.key_averages().table(sort_by="cuda_time_total", row_limit=15)
```
```

Let's see the two in action with our first execution.
```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py
```

If you run the above you will find a folder `traces/01_matmul_add` with the two artifacts:
```
64_bf16_cold_eager.json
64_bf16_cold_eager.txt
```

The `.txt` file holds the profiler table. Upon opening the file, one would be greeted with a big table with the first column consisting of the events that were triggered inside the scope of profile.

The other columns are related to the time the event takes on the CPU or GPU. Look at which events take the most amount of time, and try to intuitively understand if that event should in fact take so much time. It is also important to look at the column "# of Calls" which dictates how many times the event was triggered.

While we are at it, let's also talk about "Self CPU/CUDA" vs "CPU/CUDA total". The "Self" columns measure time spent only inside the event itself, excluding its children. The "total" columns include the event and all of its children together. So if you look at the "CPU total" of `matmul_add`, it consists of the time it took on self plus the children events it triggered. This is an important demarcation to note.

> If you have looked at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you look at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace after warmup steps where ProfileStep#2 no longer shows cold-start overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png)|
| :--: |
| Figure 5: After warming up, every profile step takes a similar amount of time |

In Figure 5 we see that each profile steps takes similar time, but this does not mean we were able to optimize the one time overheads. We warmed up the runs so that the overheads were not profiled.

### Why is there an offset of ~2.5 ms between the CPU and GPU lanes?

| ![2.32 millisecond offset between the CPU lane and the GPU lane in a PyTorch profiler trace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-bw-kernel-launch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 6: The 2.32 ms offset between the CPU and GPU lanes |

In Figure 6, we see that the CPU and GPU lanes have an offset of around 2.32 ms. One might think the algorithm warmup combined with the schedule's `wait` and `warmup` should keep a stable CUDA stream and would diminish the offset.

> To uncover what is really happening, let's change our schedule a little

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To uncover what is really happening, let's change our schedule a little:
```

The best way to rule out other possibilities is to profile for more iterations and see whether a similar window appears in other parts of the trace. To do that we run with `active=20`.

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 active iterations confirming the buffer-request gap only appears once](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 9: With 20 active steps the gap only shows up once, confirming it is a buffer request |

As shown in Figure 9, we see a similar trend in step 1, and can safely conclude that it was indeed another buffer request.

### The chain of events

| ![nested CPU dispatch chain in PyTorch profiler: ProfileStep, matmul_add, aten::matmul, aten::mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/cpu-nests.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: The chain of dispatch |

> In Figure 10, we see the nested CPU calls. This is an important visualization, where one gets to understand what does a chain of dispatch really look like.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Figure 10, we see the nested CPU calls. This is an important visualization, where one gets to understand what a chain of dispatch really looks like.
```

We begin with `ProfileStep#<id>` which encapsulates the profiling step. Due to us annotating the step, we see the `matmul_add` row. The `matmul_add` consists of two `aten` calls, one for matrix multiplication and one for addition.

The `aten::matmul` is the user-facing PyTorch operation. `aten::mm` is the 2D matrix-matrix multiply backend. It is very interesting to note how PyTorch calls `aten::bmm` (batched matrix multiplication) if we add the batch axis to our matrices.

```diff
- x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- w = torch.randn( args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

+ x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ w = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace showing aten::matmul dispatching aten::bmm for 3D batched tensors](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/bmm.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 11: Batched Matrix Multiplication |

> In Figure 11, we show just that. Upon adding the batch axis to the inputs, `aten::matmul` now encapsulates a bunch of other prerequisite CUDA runtime calls along with `aten::bmm`. This was a fascinating find and I wanted to note this behaviour.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Figure 11, we show just that. Upon adding the batch axis to the inputs, `aten::matmul` now encapsulates a bunch of other prerequisite CUDA runtime calls along with `aten::bmm`. This was a fascinating find, and I wanted to note this behaviour.
```

Author: Removed the line altogether.

In Figure 15, we notice that the matmul kernel for profile step 3 takes longer on the GPU than the others. This is particularly interesting to note, because the other kernels were the exact same, which means there were no cuBLAS heuristics involved. There are no scheduling gaps, the CPU launches are normal, and it is not a profiler artifact.

This trace in Figure 15 makes a useful point that's easy to miss in idealized examples: kernel runtimes are not constants, even on dedicated hardware running identical code on identical data.

Let's make this more concrete by modifying the script a little. We run the iteration 20 times, capturing each of the steps.

```diff
- schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)
+ schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=0, warmup=0, active=20, repeat=1)

- for _ in range(5):
+ for _ in range(20):
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 matmul iterations showing kernel runtime variance](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters-kernels.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 16: Across 20 iterations the same matmul kernel runs at different speeds |

> The different compute times can be blamed to a bunch of reasons:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The different compute times can be blamed on a bunch of reasons:
```

- GPU clocks on idle and boost
- GPU heating
- GPU power management
- Driver side housekeeping

A reader who only saw the average would conclude that a matmul took ~1 ms (mean of 5 = 1084 µs); a reader who looked at the trace would see that the matmul takes ~580 µs except when the GPU throws a fit. Those are very different mental models, and only one of them is correct.

## Let's see some torch compile at work

> Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed me. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed me. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor-heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:
```

1. `TorchDynamo` captures Python execution into an FX graph
2. `AOTAutograd` prepares forward/backward graphs when gradients are involved
3. `Inductor` lowers the graph into optimized CPU or GPU code.

In this section, we talk about compilation and look at the profiler traces.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 --warmup --compile
```

| ![torch.compile region highlighted in a PyTorch profiler trace, showing TorchDynamo and Inductor frames](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/compilation-region.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 17: The compiled regions show up as TorchDynamo and Inductor frames in the trace |

### Did we fuse the matmul and add kernels into one?

> | ![Compiled trace showing aten::addmm replacing the eager aten::add and aten::mm pair](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/fused-ops.png) | ![eager mode profiler trace showing separate aten::add and aten::mm dispatch](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png) |

Reviewer 3: Figure 19 is not referenced in the text and it's the same as a previously used image, is that correct? Also, its shape is strange when rendered

Author: Made the changes in the latest commit! Thanks for catching this.

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: sayakpaul
  - user: sergiopaniego
---

# Profiling in PyTorch: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler

![Thumbnail of the blog post](assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png)

Have you ever wondered what goes on under the hood of CPU and GPU your model runs on? To quench that thirst, you might find yourself reading the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), looking at the PyTorch operations, and then wondering how those kernels are dispatched, and how they actually run.

> Working at Hugging Face has its own perks, you are surrounded by smarter people all the time. Upon talking to my colleagues about my motivation, I was quickly pointed to the "skill of profiling". If I was given a dollar for every time I was advised to work on profiling, I would have 3 dollars, because I had asked [Sayak Paul](https://huggingface.co/sayakpaul), [Rémi Ouazan Reboul](https://huggingface.co/ror), and [Ferdinand Mom](https://huggingface.co/3outeille).

Reviewer 4: This is very kind tbh! But it breaks the flow a bit, perhaps we can move this to the end of the post ?

2. [Annotate](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L32) the algorithm. While this is completely optional, we recommend doing this. The `record_function` annotates our function as `matmul_add`, which will be easy to navigate in the traces (as we note later)
```py
def step():
  with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
    return fn(x, w, b)
```
3. Wrap the code with the `torch.profiler.profile` [context manager](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L53-L62)
```py
  with torch.profiler.profile(
    activities=[
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,  # the cpu activities
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA, # the gpu activities
    ],
  ) as prof:
    # it is recommened to run events mutiple times to warm up the GPUs
    for _ in range(5):
      step()
      prof.step()
```
4. Export the [profile](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L70)
```py
prof.export_chrome_trace(trace_path)
prof.key_averages().table(sort_by="cuda_time_total", row_limit=15)
```

The profiler exports two distinct artifacts:

> 1. The profiler table: Provides the statistical summary of the algorithm. It answers "What is expensive". This becomes really helpful to figure out hotspots. A hotspot would be events that take the most amount of time, can be a bottleneck of the pipeline, or an event that is triggered a lot of times.

Reviewer 4: `expensive` is the right metaphorical notion but maybe not the most precise? `What is taking the most time` or something along those lines might be more grounded, or we can clarify what `expensive` means before (eg. expensive in time)

Author: I think "What is taking the most time" is simple and really drives the point home. Will update this in the latest commit.

> 2. The profiler trace: Provides the temporal execution view. Answers "When and Why it happened", depicting the activities taking place on the CPU and the GPU. This is helpful when we want to investigate the kernel(s) that were launched, any delays in launching them, any overlap between CPU and GPU activities, etc.

Reviewer 4: Same, I feel like a newcomer might need more precision in the terms we are using here, so clarifying the `it` in `when and why it happens` might be worth it. Maybe it could be replaced with `operation` ? `kernel` would be too technical and not entirely correct

Author: Addressed in the latest commit.

> [!NOTE]
> It is recommended to run this script on a machine with a GPU.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 64
```

If you run the above script (on a GPU machine) you will find a folder `traces/01_matmul_add` with the two artifacts:

```bash
64_bf16_cold_eager.json
64_bf16_cold_eager.txt
```

| ![Profiler table for matmul add on 64 sized matrices](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/profile-table-64.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 1: Profiler table for matmul add on 64 sized matrices|

The `.txt` file holds the profiler table. Upon opening the file, as shown in Figure 1, one would be greeted with a big table with the first column consisting of the events that were triggered inside the scope of profile.

The other columns are related to the time the event takes on the CPU or GPU or any other device(s) specified in `activities` within `torch.profiler.profile`. Look at which events take the most amount of time, and try to intuitively understand if that event should in fact take that time. It is also important to look at the column "# of Calls" which dictates how many times the event was triggered.

> While we are at it, let's also talk about "Self CPU/CUDA" vs "CPU/CUDA total". The "Self" columns measure time spent only inside the event itself, excluding its children. The "total" columns include the event and all of its children together. So if you look at the "CPU total" of `matmul_add`, it consists of the time it took on self plus the children events it triggered. This is an important demarcation to note.

Reviewer 4: Maybe `nuance` would fit better than `demarcation` here?

If you look at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that

```bash
Self CPU time total: 2.314ms
Self CUDA time total: 23.104us
```

> The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, we are spending ~112x more time than the GPU (`ampere_bf16_s16816gemm...`) on the CPU (`matmul_add`).  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the launch overheads on the CPU side are much larger than the work the kernel does on the GPU. The easiest way to move out of the overhead-bound regime is to make a bigger matrix multiplications.

Reviewer 4: Just thinking about readability here:
`we are spending ~112x more time than the GPU on the CPU`
could be:
`the time spent on GPU is less than 1% of the time spent on CPU`
feel free to ignore

Author: Oh! I like this way better. Thanks for the suggestion.

> The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, we are spending ~112x more time than the GPU (`ampere_bf16_s16816gemm...`) on the CPU (`matmul_add`).  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the launch overheads on the CPU side are much larger than the work the kernel does on the GPU. The easiest way to move out of the overhead-bound regime is to make a bigger matrix multiplications.

Reviewer 4: ```This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the launch overheads on the CPU side are much larger than the work the kernel does on the GPU.```
I am not sure it is clear what the CPU launches at this point: the word `kernel` has not been defined (or I missed it). Perhaps It would improve readability to first clarify that:
1. the CPU is the one launching computations on the GPU
2. these computations are called kernels
That way, this paragraphs could read:

```This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the CPU takes more time launching kernels on the GPU than the kernels takes to execute.```

or something along those lines. Then the solution appears organically: we can restore balance by making kernels take longer to execute.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 
```

| ![Profiler table for matmul add algorithm on 4096 sized matrices](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/profiler-table-4096.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: Profiler table for matmul add on 4096 sized matrices |

The last two lines in Figure 2 is:

```bash
Self CPU time total: 4.908ms
Self CUDA time total: 4.495ms
```

> Both the time are in ms, which means we have materialized more GPU time just by increasing the size of the matrix multiplications. If you look at Figure X you would also notice that the most CUDA time is now taken by `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..` and not by `matmul_add`. This means that we were indeed able to move from overhead bound to compute bound.

Reviewer 4: ```time is now taken by `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..` and not by `matmul_add` ```
maybe it is worth clarifying that one is the kernel and the other the CPU dispatch:
```time is now taken by the GPU kernel (`ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..`) and not by the CPU operation that launched it (`matmul_add`) ```

| :--: |
| Figure 5: `ProfileStep#2` is visibly wider than the steps that follow it |

In Figure 5, we notice that `ProfileStep#2` takes more time compared to the other steps, and upon looking closely you would see a similar pattern with the `matmul_add` annotation as well. The smoking gun is inside the annotation, not the annotation itself:

| Step | `matmul_add` start | `aten::matmul` start | gap |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| #2 | 138.736 | 366.493 | 227.757 µs |
| #3 | 517.926 | 523.447 | 5.521 µs |
| #4 | 610.039 | 614.527 | 4.488 µs |

| ![228 microsecond gap between record_function matmul_add and the aten::matmul dispatch in profile step 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-227.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 6: The ~228 µs dead window between `record_function("matmul_add")` and `aten::matmul` |

That ~228 µs shown in Figure 6 is the "dead window" between entering `record_function("matmul_add")` and PyTorch actually dispatching `aten::matmul`. This can happen for multiple reasons: 

> - cuBLAS keeps a persistent workspace. Even though the schedule's `warmup=1` step ran a GEMM (GEneral Matrix-Matrix Multiplication), the workspace allocation can still hit on the first active call if the previous launch's allocator/sync state hadn't settled.

Reviewer 4: This (and the two other bullet points) feel very technical and kind of out place here IMO. Maybe we can summarize this three points in a short list, like this:
```This can happen for multiple reasons: workspace allocation (ie. memory needed for the kernel), ...`
The thing I want to avoid is a reader spending too much time trying to understand these bullet points when they don't have _that_ much importance in the scheme of the blogpost.

Author: Very well place point. I will address this in the latest commit.

| :--: |
| Figure 11: With 20 active steps the gap only shows up once, confirming it is a buffer request |

As shown in Figure 11, we see a similar trend in `ProfileStep#1`. This is aligned to our findings previously and can safely conclude that it was indeed another buffer request.

### The chain of events

| ![nested CPU dispatch chain in PyTorch profiler: ProfileStep, matmul_add, aten::matmul, aten::mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/cpu-nests.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 12: The chain of dispatch |

In Figure 12, we see the nested CPU calls. This is an important visualization, where one gets to understand what a chain of dispatch really looks like.

We begin with `ProfileStep#<id>` which encapsulates the profiling step. Due to us annotating the step, we see the `matmul_add` row. The `matmul_add` consists of two `aten` calls, one for matrix multiplication and one for matrix addition.

The `aten::matmul` is the [ATen-level](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/tree/main/aten/src/ATen) dispatch that those user-facing PyTorch matmul calls land on. `aten::mm` is the 2D matrix-matrix multiply backend.

> It is very interesting to note how PyTorch calls `aten::bmm` (batched matrix multiplication) if we add the batch axis to our matrices. Let's take a de-tour and see the `aten::bmm` in action.

Reviewer 4: I think it is spelt `detour`

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch Part 1: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: sayakpaul
  - user: sergiopaniego
  - user: ror
---

# Profiling in PyTorch Part 1: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler

![Thumbnail of the blog post](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png)

> Have you ever wondered what goes on under the hood of CPU and GPU your model runs on? To quench that thirst, you might find yourself reading the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), looking at the PyTorch operations, and then wondering how those kernels are dispatched, and how they actually run.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Have you ever wondered what goes on under the hood of the CPU and GPU that your model runs on? To quench that thirst, you might find yourself reading the `modeling_<model_name>.py` files in [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers), looking at the PyTorch operations, and then wondering how those kernels are dispatched, and how they actually run.
```

This is the opening post of **Profiling in PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to more advanced workloads, involving large models.

In this essay, we document "How to profile in PyTorch" from a beginner's point of view. You need no prerequisites to go through this, apart from knowing basic PyTorch. We will try to make this as educational as possible, so this can be treated as a leisurely read with some "Aha!" moments.

Before we begin, we would like to address two things:

1. A GPU **kernel** is a program that runs in parallel on many threads of the GPU.
2. The CPU is the one that **schedules and launches** these kernels.

Now that you have the two things in mind, the essay is going to read better!

> [!NOTE]

> > Here is the entire script that we use for the essay: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). It is adviced to open this script on a seperate tab and walk through the code step by step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Here is the entire script that we use for the essay: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). It is advised to open this script on a separate tab and walk through the code step by step.
```

To profile, we will be using the `torch.profiler` module. The steps involved are:

1. Have the [algorithm ready](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L26-L27) (here `def fn`, which wraps the matrix multiplication and matrix addition)
2. [Annotate](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L32) the algorithm. While this is completely optional, we recommend doing this. The `record_function` annotates our function as `matmul_add`, which will be easy to navigate in the traces (as we note later)
```py
def step():
  with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
    return fn(x, w, b)
```
3. Wrap the code with the `torch.profiler.profile` [context manager](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L53-L62)
```py
  with torch.profiler.profile(
    activities=[
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,  # the cpu activities
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA, # the gpu activities
    ],
  ) as prof:

>     # it is recommened to run events mutiple times to warm up the GPUs

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # it is recommended to run events multiple times to warm up the GPUs
```

If you look at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that

```bash
Self CPU time total: 2.314ms
Self CUDA time total: 23.104us
```

The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, the time spent on GPUs (the kernel `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm...`) is less than 1% of the time spent on the CPU (the `matmul_add` operation).  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the CPU takes more time launching kernels on the GPU than the kernels takes to execute. The easiest way to move out of the overhead-bound regime is to make a bigger matrix multiplications.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 
```

| ![Profiler table for matmul add algorithm on 4096 sized matrices](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/profiler-table-4096.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: Profiler table for matmul add on 4096 sized matrices |

The last two lines in Figure 2 is:

```bash
Self CPU time total: 4.908ms
Self CUDA time total: 4.495ms
```

> Both the time are in ms, which means we have materialized more GPU time just by increasing the size of the matrix multiplications. If you look at Figure X you would also notice that the most CUDA time is now taken by the GPU kernel (`ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..`) and not by the CPU operation that launched it (`matmul_add`). This means that we were indeed able to move from overhead bound to compute bound.

Reviewer 3: `Figure X` -> placeholder

The `aten::matmul` is the [ATen-level](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/tree/main/aten/src/ATen) dispatch that those user-facing PyTorch matmul calls land on. `aten::mm` is the 2D matrix-matrix multiply backend.

It is very interesting to note how PyTorch calls `aten::bmm` (batched matrix multiplication) if we add the batch axis to our matrices. Let's take a detour and see the `aten::bmm` in action.

```diff
- x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- w = torch.randn( args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

+ x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ w = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace showing aten::matmul dispatching aten::bmm for 3D batched tensors](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/bmm.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 13: Batched Matrix Multiplication |

> In Figure 13, upon adding the batch axis to the inputs, `aten::matmul` now encapsulates a bunch of other prerequisite CUDA runtime calls along with `aten::bmm` (instead of `aten:mm`). This also hints at the heuristics that cuBLAS needs to do in oder to dispatch the right (most suitable) kernel for the program.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Figure 13, upon adding the batch axis to the inputs, `aten::matmul` now encapsulates a bunch of other prerequisite CUDA runtime calls along with `aten::bmm` (instead of `aten:mm`). This also hints at the heuristics that cuBLAS needs to do in order to dispatch the right (most suitable) kernel for the program.
```

- GPU clocks on idle and boost
- GPU heating
- GPU power management
- Driver side housekeeping

A reader who only saw the average would conclude that a matmul took ~1 ms (mean of 5 = 1084 µs); a reader who looked at the trace would see that the matmul takes ~580 µs except when the GPU throws a fit. Those are very different mental models, and only one of them is correct.

## Let's see some torch compile at work

Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed me. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor-heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:

1. `TorchDynamo` captures Python execution into an FX graph
2. `AOTAutograd` prepares forward/backward graphs when gradients are involved
3. `Inductor` lowers the graph into optimized CPU or GPU code.

In this section, we talk about compilation and look at the profiler traces.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 --warmup --compile
```

> The `args.compile` flag triggeres the following code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `args.compile` flag triggers the following code:
```

> If the reader is interested on how guards work in torch compile, here is a [great read](https://torchcompile-guards.hashnode.dev/inside-torchcompile-guards-how-they-work-what-they-cost-and-ways-to-optimize)!

### torch.compile's runtime architecture

While we know in theory what happens when we compile our functions it is equally important to see it in action. Let's look at the CPU-side hierarchy which reflects `torch.compile`'s runtime architecture.

**TorchDynamo Cache Lookup** is where Dynamo checks that the current call still matches what was compiled with the same input shapes, dtypes, devices, and tensor metadata. If anything mismatched, Dynamo would recompile. This cost is paid every call, even after compilation.

**Torch-Compiled Region** is the wrapper that "enters" the compiled version. **AOTDispatcher Runtime Wrapper Prologue** is AOT Autograd's runtime wrapper. Even though we don't need gradients here, AOTDispatcher is always in the stack handling tensor metadata, view tracking, and would set up the backward pass if `requires_grad` were true.

> **## Call CompiledFxGraph <hash>** is where the actual generated code runs. The string after "CompiledFxGraph" is the content hash of the FX graph. It's the same across all three active steps, confirming cache hits.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Call CompiledFxGraph <hash>** is where the actual generated code runs. The string after "CompiledFxGraph" is the content hash of the FX graph. It's the same across all three active steps, confirming cache hits.
```

Author: This is not a typo, entire name includes the hashtags.

> [!TIP]
> You can find the generated code on disk under `/tmp/torchinductor_<user>/fxgraph` keyed by this hash, useful when you want to read the Triton/C++ that Inductor actually produced.

### Do the CUDA launches go down by half?

| ![compiled matmul trace showing Memcpy DtoD and GEMM kernels launched per step](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/memcpy.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 23: Each compiled step still launches two GPU kernels, a Device-to-Device memcpy and the GEMM |

Looking at the traces in Figure 23, we were really happy to notice only one `cudaLaunchKernel` per step. This observation was directly contradicting what we were seeing in the GPU trace. There were still two kernels being launched per step, namely the `Memcpy DtoD (Device -> Device)` and the GEMM. Going back to the CPU trace, we noticed that we had completely missed the `cudaMemcpyAsync` dispatch.

> `addmm` computes `out = α·A·B + β·C`, and cuBLAS's GEMM-with-bias-add epilogue writes into a destination buffer that needs to already contain the bias. An epilogues can be thought of all the operations that happen _after_ a GEMM. In the world of deep-learning we constantly come up with GEMM-Epilogues like activations, bias addtion, normalization and many more. This is why there are cuBLAS GEMM-with-<specific epilogue> kernel variants.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`addmm` computes `out = α·A·B + β·C`, and cuBLAS's GEMM-with-bias-add epilogue writes into a destination buffer that needs to already contain the bias. An epilogues can be thought of all the operations that happen _after_ a GEMM. In the world of deep-learning we constantly come up with GEMM-Epilogues like activations, bias addition, normalization and many more. This is why there are cuBLAS GEMM-with-<specific epilogue> kernel variants.
```

3. **Part 3:** put it all together on Large Language Models with `transformers`.

We document the journey from a beginner's point of view. No prerequisites apart from basic PyTorch. Treat this as a leisurely read with some "Aha!" moments. The structure of the post is intentionally question-led: we open a trace, ask "wait, why is *that* happening?", and chase the answer until something clicks. By the end you should know:

- how to set up `torch.profiler` and what it actually hands back,
- how to read the profiler table and the trace (CPU lane, GPU lane, and the suspicious gaps in between),
- the chain of events from a Python call all the way down to a CUDA kernel,
- what changes (and, more interestingly, what does **not** change) when you slap `torch.compile` on top.

Before we begin, two definitions that will make everything below read better:

1. A GPU **kernel** is a program that runs in parallel on many threads of the GPU.
2. The CPU **schedules and launches** these kernels.

You don't usually have to write GPU kernels yourself; when you use a PyTorch operation, it is automatically translated to one or more kernels that do the job on GPU.

> With those two ideas in your back pocket, let's start asking questions.

Reviewer 2: I like this version of the intro a lot more! 🔥

> [!NOTE]

> > Here is the entire script that we use for the post: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). It is advised to open this script on a separate tab and walk through the code step by step. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> Here is the entire script that we use for the post: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). We recommend opening this script in a separate tab and walk through the code step by step. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts.
```

## The matrix multiplication and addition operation

> As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), like we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start our profiling journey with anything else.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), just as we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start our profiling journey with anything else.
```

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --warmup
```

[Perfetto Trace for 64x64 with Warmup](https://ui.perfetto.dev/#!/?url=https://huggingface.co/buckets/ariG23498/traces/resolve/01_matmul_add/64_bf16_warm_eager.json)

| ![PyTorch profiler trace after warmup steps where ProfileStep#2 no longer shows cold-start overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png)|
| :--: |
| Figure 7: After warming up, every profile step takes a similar amount of time |

In Figure 7 we see that each profile step takes a similar time, but this does not mean we were able to optimize the one time overheads. We warmed up the runs so that the overheads were not profiled.

### Why is there an offset of ~2.5 ms between the CPU and GPU lanes?

| ![2.32 millisecond offset between the CPU lane and the GPU lane in a PyTorch profiler trace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-bw-kernel-launch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: The ~2.5 ms offset between the CPU and GPU lanes |

> In Figure 8, we see that the CPU and GPU lanes have an offset of around 2.5 ms. One might think the warmup stage combined with the schedule's `wait` and `warmup` should keep a stable CUDA stream and would diminish the offset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Figure 8, we see that the CPU and GPU lanes have an offset of around 2.5 ms: this is the delay after the CPU submits the CUDA kernels and the time they actually start executing. One might think the warmup stage combined with the schedule's `wait` and `warmup` should keep a stable CUDA stream and would diminish the offset.
```

"offset" sounded too neutral to me, trying to clarify as per your answer below. Feel free to reword if inaccurate, of course.

`cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor` is a planning call and is purely CPU side. It asks: "given a kernel function, a chosen block size, and a chosen dynamic shared memory size, how many blocks of this kernel can simultaneously reside on one SM (Streaming Multiprocessor)?"

This begs the question, why do we need planning for matmul and not for add?

To understand this, we have to look at the kernel's resource footprint. If you click on the GPU kernels, you will be able to inspect the resource footprint for the respective kernel.

| ![cuBLAS matmul kernel resource footprint: registers, shared memory and block size in Perfetto](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/matmul-footprint.png) | ![elementwise add CUDA kernel resource footprint with 32 registers and zero shared memory](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/add-footprint.png) |
| :--: | :--: |
| Figure 15: Matmul footprint | Figure 16: Add footprint |

> In Figure 15, we note that for matrix multiplication the `registers per thread` and `shared memory` are dynamic (based on the size of the matrix). cuBLAS ships hundreds of kernel variants, and each has a heuristic-driven launch path that needs runtime information about hardware capacity. The occupancy query is part of that heuristic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Figure 15, we note that for matrix multiplication the `registers per thread` and `shared memory` are dynamic (based on the size of the matrix). cuBLAS ships hundreds of kernel variants, and each has a heuristic-driven launch path that needs runtime information about hardware capacity. The occupancy query is part of that heuristic. Conceptually, we can think of GPU-accelerated matmuls as [working on independent tiles](https://alvinwan.com/how-to-tile-matrix-multiplication/): how many tiles we use and how big each tile needs to be depends on the matrices and the hardware. Modern algorithms are way more complicated than that, but this is still a good reference framework.
```

```diff
- schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)
+ schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=0, warmup=0, active=20, repeat=1)

- for _ in range(5):
+ for _ in range(20):
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 matmul iterations showing kernel runtime variance](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters-kernels.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 18: Across 20 iterations the same matmul kernel runs at different speeds |

Figure 18 reveals a similar finding. While each kernel was the exact same, they time differently. The different compute times can be blamed on a bunch of reasons:

- GPU clocks on idle and boost
- GPU heating
- GPU power management
- Driver side housekeeping

A reader who only saw the average would conclude that a matmul took ~1 ms (mean of 5 = 1084 µs); a reader who looked at the trace would see that the matmul takes ~580 µs except when the GPU throws a fit. Those are very different mental models, and only one of them is correct.

## Let's see some torch compile at work

> Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed me. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor-heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:

Reviewer 3: keeping the same voice
```suggestion
Working with `torch.compile` has always amazed us. One writes normal eager PyTorch code, but PyTorch tries to capture tensor-heavy regions, turn them into graphs, optimize them, and run generated code. The default backend is usually `TorchInductor`, and the broad pipeline is:
```

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch Part 1: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-profiler/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: sayakpaul
  - user: sergiopaniego
  - user: ror
---

> # Profiling in PyTorch Part 1: A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Profiling in PyTorch (Part 1): A Beginner's Guide to torch.profiler
```

maybe?

Working at Hugging Face has its own perks, you are surrounded by smarter people all the time. Upon talking to my colleagues about my motivation, I was quickly pointed to the "skill of profiling". If I was given a dollar for every time I was advised to work on profiling, I would have 3 dollars, because I had asked [Sayak Paul](https://huggingface.co/sayakpaul), [Rémi Ouazan Reboul](https://huggingface.co/ror), and [Ferdinand Mom](https://huggingface.co/3outeille).

This is the opening post of **Profiling in PyTorch**, a series where we slowly build up the skill of reading profiler traces, starting from the simplest possible operation and gradually working our way up to more advanced workloads, involving large models.

In this essay, we document "How to profile in PyTorch" from a beginner's point of view. You need no prerequisites to go through this, apart from knowing basic PyTorch. We will try to make this as educational as possible, so this can be treated as a leisurely read with some "Aha!" moments.

Before we begin, we would like to address a few things:

1. A GPU **kernel** is a program that runs in parallel on many threads of the GPU.

> 2. The CPU is the one that **schedules and launches** these kernels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The CPU **schedules and launches** these kernels.

You don't usually have to write GPU kernels yourself; when you use a PyTorch operation, it is automatically translated to one or more kernels that do the job on GPU.
```

Perhaps?

Maybe some cross-references to the couple of kernels posts would be useful somewhere as well.

Now that you have the two things in mind, the essay is going to read better!

> [!NOTE]

> > Here is the entire script that we use for the essay: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). It is advised to open this script on a separate tab and walk through the code step by step. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Here is the entire script that we use for the post: [`01_matmul_add.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py). It is advised to open this script on a separate tab and walk through the code step by step. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts.
```

(maybe some people may conflate essay == opinion piece too much?)

  - [The chain of events](#the-chain-of-events)
  - [Why does matmul have an extra CUDA runtime call?](#why-does-matmul-have-an-extra-cuda-runtime-call)
  - [Why is cudaDeviceSynchronize so big (~1.78 ms)?](#why-is-cudadevicesynchronize-so-big-178-ms)
- [4096x4096 traces](#4096x4096-traces)
  - [Why does the same kernel take more time compared to others?](#why-does-the-same-kernel-take-more-time-compared-to-others)
- [Let's see some torch compile at work](#lets-see-some-torch-compile-at-work)
  - [Did we fuse the matmul and add kernels into one?](#did-we-fuse-the-matmul-and-add-kernels-into-one)
  - [torch.compile's runtime architecture](#torchcompiles-runtime-architecture)
  - [Do the CUDA launches go down by half?](#do-the-cuda-launches-go-down-by-half)
  - [CPU overhead went up, not down](#cpu-overhead-went-up-not-down)
- [Trace reading cheatsheet](#trace-reading-cheatsheet)
  - [Profiler table](#profiler-table)
  - [CPU lane](#cpu-lane)
  - [GPU lane](#gpu-lane)
  - [Dispatch chain](#dispatch-chain)
  - [torch.compile](#torchcompile)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

> ## The matrix multiplication and addition operation

Reviewer 2: One additional concept that might be useful in this section is that matmul can be made faster by tiling; this is what allows each gpu compute unit to run in parallel with others.

Author: I like the idea, but there is no direct contact of tiling in this blog post, do you reckon we should add this as a note for the reader to further dive into?

Reviewer 2: The conceptual journey I had in mind was: matrix multiplication is a nested for-loop, but this is slow; we can compute tiles independently; a gpu "kernel" knows how to do this; GPUs have a lot of compute units; we dispatch the kernel to the GPU and launch many copies at once (the more the bigger the matrices are); we wait on CPU until all are done.

It was meant as a framework to give more intuition about what "kernels" really are. But perhaps it's too much of a digression at this point.

(Your pallas post does a great job at this by the way)

Author: > But perhaps it's too much of a digression at this point.

I think so too. This would mean a lot of diagrams to showcase tiling and also proving what works and what does not when it comes to properly tilings things together.

I would not want to overcomplicate this section too much.

> (Your pallas post does a great job at this by the way)

🤗

As correctly [quipped by Dr. Sara Hooker](https://youtu.be/7knwihgj0fU?si=uvzGH-J9bsCHP4Nn&t=2199), like we are primarily made up of water, Deep Neural Networks are primarily made up of matrix multiplies. As fundamental as they are, it would be a shame to start our profiling journey with anything else.

```py
def fn(x, w, b):
  return torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)
```

> The matrix addition along with the matrix multiplication mimics how weights and biases interact in a neuron. This addition (pun intended) will help us understand how it paves the way for compilation [later in the essay](#lets-see-some-torch-compile-at-work).

To profile, we will be using the `torch.profiler` module. The steps involved are:

> 1. Have the [algorithm ready](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L26-L27) (here `def fn`, which wraps the matrix multiplication and matrix addition)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Have the [code to profile ready](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L26-L27) (here `def fn`, which wraps the matrix multiplication and matrix addition)
```

I thought that we were starting from a hand-crafted multiply-add algorithm 🤣

2. [Annotate](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L32) the algorithm. While this is completely optional, we recommend doing this. The `record_function` annotates our function as `matmul_add`, which will be easy to navigate in the traces (as we note later)
```py
def step():
  with torch.profiler.record_function("matmul_add"):
    return fn(x, w, b)
```
3. Wrap the code with the `torch.profiler.profile` [context manager](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L53-L62)
```py
  with torch.profiler.profile(
    activities=[
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CPU,  # the cpu activities
        torch.profiler.ProfilerActivity.CUDA, # the gpu activities
    ],
  ) as prof:
    # it is recommended to run events multiple times to warm up the GPUs
    for _ in range(5):
      step()
      prof.step()
```
4. Export the [profile](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L70)
```py
prof.export_chrome_trace(trace_path)
prof.key_averages().table(sort_by="cuda_time_total", row_limit=15)

> ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain why it's "export_chrome_trace", it could be puzzling.

Author: Added a comment on top of the code.

The other columns are related to the time the event takes on the CPU or GPU or any other device(s) specified in `activities` within `torch.profiler.profile`. Look at which events take the most amount of time, and try to intuitively understand if that event should in fact take that time. It is also important to look at the column "# of Calls" which dictates how many times the event was triggered.

While we are at it, let's also talk about "Self CPU/CUDA" vs "CPU/CUDA total". The "Self" columns measure time spent only inside the event itself, excluding its children. The "total" columns include the event and all of its children together. So if you look at the "CPU total" of `matmul_add`, it consists of the time it took on self plus the children events it triggered. This is an important nuance to note.

If you look at the last two lines out of the table you would notice that the profiler tells us that

```bash
Self CPU time total: 2.314ms
Self CUDA time total: 23.104us
```

> The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, the time spent on GPUs (the kernel `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm...`) is less than 1% of the time spent on the CPU (the `matmul_add` operation).  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. This is a textbook case of the algorithm being overhead-bound. In simple words, the CPU takes more time launching kernels on the GPU than the kernels take to execute. The easiest way to move out of the overhead-bound regime is to use bigger matrix multiplications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The CPU time is in `ms` while the GPU time is in `us`. To put things in perspective, the time spent on GPUs (the kernel `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm...`) is less than 1% of the time spent on the CPU (the `matmul_add` operation).  The GPU stays idle most of the time, which is an immediate red flag. The reason this happens is that the GPU can compute a small matmul very quickly, so our code spends most of the time preparing the kernels, launching them on the GPU, sending the data to multiply and gathering the results. This concept is known as an _overhead-bound_ algorithm.

The easiest way to move out of this regime is to use bigger matrix multiplications.
```

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we could do a small plot similar to the timeline view, but simplified, showing the percentage of time spent on each conceptual task.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 
```

| ![Profiler table for matmul add algorithm on 4096 sized matrices](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/profiler-table-4096.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: Profiler table for matmul add on 4096 sized matrices |

The last two lines in Figure 2 are:

```bash
Self CPU time total: 4.908ms
Self CUDA time total: 4.495ms
```

> Both times are in ms, which means we have materialized more GPU time just by increasing the size of the matrix multiplications. If you look at Figure 2 you would also notice that the most CUDA time is now taken by the GPU kernel (`ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_..`) and not by the CPU operation that launched it (`matmul_add`). This means that we were indeed able to move from overhead bound to compute bound.

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain that the dominant part of CPU time is `cudaDeviceSynchronize`. It's slower for a larger matrix (it's normal, we have to transfer more data), but time only ~doubled from 1.786 to 4.630 ms; but we only pay this once in exchange for a much larger GPU payload (14µs to 4.285ms for the kernel execution time).

Author: I don't quite understand what you would want me to focus on. While the `cudaDeviceSynchronize` is a dominant part of the CPU, it is only evident in the smaller matrix size due to the offset in the GPU and CPU trace due to a buffer request which was talked about later. This is not dependent on the size of the matrices.

Reviewer 2: Then perhaps I'm not understanding it well, will re-read the rest.

| :--: |
| Figure 3: Profiler trace for matmul and add on 64 sized matrices |

In Figure 3, we see the profiler trace for the matrix multiplication and addition. Here the bar width indicates the duration of an event, the vertical nesting is the call hierarchy, the CPU lane denotes the events that happen on the CPU, while the GPU lane shows the actual kernel executions. One might also notice the empty spaces which are the waiting or idle time.

The script was run with default configurations which are:

- size 64: The inputs, weights and biases are sized (64, 64)
- dtype bf16: The data type is bfloat16
- no compile: We have not compiled the torch operations
- no warmup: We have not warmed up the GPU before profiling

> With Perfetto we suggest using the keyboard for quicker access to the trace. One could use "W A S D" for navigating the trace.

| ![PyTorch profiler trace with the CPU lane and GPU lane labelled side by side in Perfetto](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gpu-cpu-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: The CPU and GPU lanes of a PyTorch profiler trace |

> There are two lanes in Figure 4, one for the CPU activity and one for the GPU activity. In the CPU lane one would notice three profile steps (starting from `ProfileStep#2`). This comes from the `schedule`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two lanes in Figure 4, one for the CPU activity and one for the GPU activity. In the CPU lane one would notice three profile steps (starting from `ProfilerStep#2`). This comes from the `schedule`.
```

```py
schedule = torch.profiler.schedule(wait=1, warmup=1, active=3, repeat=1)
```

> The `wait` skips noisy initializations (`ProfileStep#0`), `warmup` runs through the profiler without recording (`ProfileStep#1`), and `active` is what shows up in trace. One can find the schedule being used in the [script here](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L58).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `wait` skips noisy initializations (`ProfilerStep#0`), `warmup` runs through the profiler without recording (`ProfilerStep#1`), and `active` is what shows up in trace. One can find the schedule being used in the [script here](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L58).
```

Let's put on our detective hats and investigate the trace and ask some questions.

> ### Why does the ProfileStep#2 take so long?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Why does the ProfilerStep#2 take so long?
```

| Step | `matmul_add` start | `aten::matmul` start | gap |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| #2 | 138.736 | 366.493 | 227.757 µs |
| #3 | 517.926 | 523.447 | 5.521 µs |
| #4 | 610.039 | 614.527 | 4.488 µs |

| ![228 microsecond gap between record_function matmul_add and the aten::matmul dispatch in profile step 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-227.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 6: The ~228 µs dead window between `record_function("matmul_add")` and `aten::matmul` |

That ~228 µs shown in Figure 6 is the "dead window" between entering `record_function("matmul_add")` and PyTorch actually dispatching `aten::matmul`. This can happen for multiple reasons, including workspace allocations, [cuBLAS](https://developer.nvidia.com/cublas) (NVIDIA’s proprietary, GPU-accelerated library for performing fundamental linear algebra operations) heuristics, or lazy module loading. We can either look away or run [some more warmup steps](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/01_matmul_add.py#L35-L39) before we profile (which is the standard)

> In the terms of profiling, warmup is when you run the events a couple of times before actually profiling it. The pre-work done by the GPU (including the above pointers) are one time efforts which we do not want to profile. In our example, we have two warmup stages, one where we actually loop over the function before entering the profiler, and two inside the profiler which is achieved by the `warmup` argument. In this section, we have enabled the actual iterations along with the schedule.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In terms of profiling, warmup is when you run the events a couple of times before actually profiling it. The pre-work done by the GPU (including the above pointers) are one time efforts which we do not want to profile. In our example, we have two warmup stages, one where we actually loop over the function before entering the profiler, and two inside the profiler which is achieved by the `warmup` argument. In this section, we have enabled the actual iterations along with the schedule.
```

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --warmup
```

[Perfetto Trace for 64x64 with Warmup](https://ui.perfetto.dev/#!/?url=https://huggingface.co/buckets/ariG23498/traces/resolve/01_matmul_add/64_bf16_warm_eager.json)

| ![PyTorch profiler trace after warmup steps where ProfileStep#2 no longer shows cold-start overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/warmup.png)|
| :--: |
| Figure 7: After warming up, every profile step takes a similar amount of time |

> In Figure 7 we see that each profile step takes a similar time, but this does not mean we were able to optimize the one time overheads. We warmed up the runs so that the overheads were not profiled.

Reviewer 2: Are we getting back to this, or is there a conclusion?

Author: This did feel abrupt when I was writing about it, and @sayakpaul also pointed it out. His suggestion was to use `torch.compile(mode="reduce_overhead")` to get rid of this, but we have not spoken about torch compile to this point.

I think we can add a section in the `torch.compile` section and talk about the overhead reducing problem there. What do you think?

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can just mention that we'll revisit later, and/or explain why this happens.

### Why is there an offset of ~2.5 ms between the CPU and GPU lanes?

| ![2.32 millisecond offset between the CPU lane and the GPU lane in a PyTorch profiler trace](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/gap-bw-kernel-launch.png) |
| :--: |

> | Figure 8: The ~2.5 ms offset between the CPU and GPU lanes |

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this offset is referring to.

Author: The time difference between the cuda launch in CPU and the actual kernels being launched on the GPU

> In Figure 8, we see that the CPU and GPU lanes have an offset of around 2.5 ms. One might think the warmup stage combined with the schedule's `wait` and `warmup` should keep a stable CUDA stream and would diminish the offset.

Reviewer 2: First time "CUDA stream" is introduced as far as I can tell.

Author: Do you think adding a link to https://huggingface.co/blog/continuous_async#what-is-a-cuda-stream would make sense here?

Reviewer 2: I would either keep it conceptual (`should keep a stable CUDA stream` -> `would keep the GPU busy` or something like that), or explain it.

But yes, that post is great to understand how the CPU and GPU work together, we could add it as a recommended resource somewhere (or here, if you want, but it's more general than that).

| ![gap between matmul and add CUDA kernels caused by profiler buffer request](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/mat-add-gap.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: A gap appears between the matmul and add kernels on profile step 1 |

Upon zooming into the GPU trace, we notice that the matmul and add kernels for `ProfileStep#0` (the CPU trace of which is not visible in the Figure) happen one after the other, while the kernels for `ProfileStep#1` have a window in between. The best explanation for this is that there was an overflow of buffers, and another buffer request was issued during the kernel execution.

The best way to rule out other possibilities is to profile for more iterations and see whether a similar window appears in other parts of the trace. To do that we run with `active=20`.

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of 20 active iterations confirming the buffer-request gap only appears once](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/20-iters.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 11: With 20 active steps the gap only shows up once, confirming it is a buffer request |

> As shown in Figure 11, we see a similar trend in `ProfileStep#1`. This is aligned with our previous findings, and we can safely conclude that it was indeed another buffer request.

Reviewer 2: And what is a buffer request?

Author: A request to allocate some memory on the GPU VRAM.

Reviewer 2: Can we explain on first use?

In Figure 12, we see the nested CPU calls. This is an important visualization, where one gets to understand what a chain of dispatch really looks like.

We begin with `ProfileStep#<id>` which encapsulates the profiling step. Due to us annotating the step, we see the `matmul_add` row. The `matmul_add` consists of two `aten` calls, one for matrix multiplication and one for matrix addition.

The `aten::matmul` is the [ATen-level](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/tree/main/aten/src/ATen) dispatch that those user-facing PyTorch matmul calls land on. `aten::mm` is the 2D matrix-matrix multiply backend.

It is very interesting to note how PyTorch calls `aten::bmm` (batched matrix multiplication) if we add the batch axis to our matrices. Let's take a detour and see the `aten::bmm` in action.

```diff
- x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- w = torch.randn( args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
- b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

+ x = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)
+ w = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

> + b = torch.randn(args.size, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)

Reviewer 2: maybe use a constant batch size for clarity?

Author: You mean `x = torch.randn(16, args.size, args.size, device=device, dtype=dtype)` where `16` is used at all the places?

Reviewer 2: Yes! I struggled to understand what was the difference; and it's unusual that batch size has anything to do with matrix dimensions (I know it's just an example)

`cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor` is a planning call and is purely CPU side. It asks: "given a kernel function, a chosen block size, and a chosen dynamic shared memory size, how many blocks of this kernel can simultaneously reside on one SM (Streaming Multiprocessor)?"

This begs the question, why do we need planning for matmul and not for add?

To understand this, we have to look at the kernel's resource footprint. If you click on the GPU kernels, you will be able to inspect the resource footprint for the respective kernel.

| ![cuBLAS matmul kernel resource footprint: registers, shared memory and block size in Perfetto](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/matmul-footprint.png) | ![elementwise add CUDA kernel resource footprint with 32 registers and zero shared memory](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/add-footprint.png) |
| :--: | :--: |
| Figure 15: Matmul footprint | Figure 16: Add footprint |

> In Figure 15, we note that for matrix multiplication the `registers per thread` and `shared memory` are dynamic (based on the size of the matrix). cuBLAS ships hundreds of kernel variants, and each has a heuristic-driven launch path that needs runtime information about hardware capacity. The occupancy query is part of that heuristic.

Reviewer 2: One way to provide hand-wavy intuition about this is that depending on the size of the matrices we have to decide how many tiles to use and how big each tile needs to be. But I have no idea what the actual parallel matmul algorithm actually is under the hood; it's probably much more complicated than that.

Author: I like this idea. Would you mind suggesting a change directly in this para. I am pretty sure the tiling would offer for a much better idea for a beginner.

I also found a really good resource on [tiling](https://alvinwan.com/how-to-tile-matrix-multiplication/) which might be worth adding somewhere.

```bash
uv run 01_matmul_add.py --size 4096 --warmup --compile
```

The `args.compile` flag triggers the following code:

```py
def fn(x, w, b):
  return torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)

fn = torch.compile(fn) if args.compile else fn
```

| ![torch.compile region highlighted in a PyTorch profiler trace, showing TorchDynamo and Inductor frames](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/compilation-region.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 19: The compiled regions show up as TorchDynamo and Inductor frames in the trace |

In Figure 19, we see the new CPU rows named `Torch-Compiled Region: 0/0` which points us to the compiled functions being used.

### Did we fuse the matmul and add kernels into one?

| ![Compiled trace showing aten::addmm replacing the eager aten::add and aten::mm pair](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-profiler/fused-ops.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 20: Compiled run dispatches a single `aten::addmm` |

Looking at Figure 20 we ask the question, did we actually fuse the multiplication and addition operations together into one?

> This is operator fusion at the graph level. Inductor took our `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` and rewrote it into a single `aten::addmm(b, x, w)` call. The important thing to note here is that it did **not** produce a **new** fused CUDA kernel. The actual GPU work is still `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x256_ldg8_f2f_stages_64x3_nn`, the same cuBLAS kernel eager mode used. So the "fusion" here is at the dispatcher level, not at the kernel level.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that we save scheduling work and this is what provides more speed benefits? Or is it something else?

In addition, note we can also use `torch.addmm` directly in our code. How does this compare?

Author: > Does this mean that we save scheduling work and this is what provides more speed benefits? Or is it something else?

I don't think there should be a speedup here, as we mostly get speedups when there is a kernel fusion, with lesser number of memory touch in the algorithm. I did not want to talk about speedups for this particular reason as this was too small and naive an operation to showcase `torch.compile` speedups with.

> In addition, note we can also use torch.addmm directly in our code. How does this compare?

A good "take home for the readers"?

> > If the reader is interested on how guards work in torch compile, here is a [great read](https://torchcompile-guards.hashnode.dev/inside-torchcompile-guards-how-they-work-what-they-cost-and-ways-to-optimize)!

Reviewer 2: We haven't explained what a guard is yet, or how the compiler optimizes for a given set of shapes (in addition to the graph manipulation we saw above).

Author: You are right. I think we should remove this.

I was under the impression that recompilation when dynamo checks might be interesting and a reader could be pointed to guards in that section, but that would be too much information.

| #2 | 0.1 | 0.2 |
| #3 | 0.07 | 0.1 |
| #4 | 0.07 | 0.1 |

Compile is roughly 2× more expensive on the CPU per step. That's because every call walks the full Dynamo > AOTAutograd > Inductor stack, on top of the same `aten::addmm` dispatch we have anyway. The compile pipeline is built for ML models with dozens of ops where the per-call overhead amortizes (for a single op it's a tax).

> [!TIP]
> `torch.compile` has a `mode` argument. It is for the reader to take home as an assignment to read the documentation and come up with a `mode` that could take the CPU overhead down. 🤗

## Trace reading cheatsheet

A quick reference for the patterns we walked through. The idea is: if you see this in a trace, this is what it usually means.

### Profiler table

| What you see | What it usually means |
| :-- | :-- |
| `Self CPU time total` ≫ `Self CUDA time total` (CPU in ms, GPU in µs) | Overhead-bound. The CPU spends more time dispatching than the GPU spends computing. Make the work bigger (larger matrices, batched ops) or fuse calls. |
| `Self CPU time total` ≈ `Self CUDA time total`, both in ms | Compute-bound. The GPU is the bottleneck, which is usually what you want. |

> | One event dominates `CUDA total` | That's your hotspot. Start the optimization there. |

Reviewer 2: But how do we optimize? So far we have just shown that larger matrices increase gpu utilization.

Author: We don't. The idea of this post was not to go for an optimization, but to read the traces and ask questions. The latest commit has the introduction aligned with the idea of this post. Do you think the intro now makes sense and lays the correct foundation for the reader?
